CORRESPONDENTS CORRESPONDENTS

Introduction

The purpose of this section is to document the various people with whom Van Gogh corresponded in the different periods of his life, discover how he got to know them, and see how the contact and correspondence progressed. Here we examine his relationship with these people, while the section I Van Gogh as a letter-writer deals with the content of the letters.

Letters from each of the correspondents can be selected on The letters by correspondent window.



Family members

Theo

By far the majority (651 out of 820) of Van Gogh’s letters are addressed to Theo, his brother and maecenas. The earliest known one dates from 29 September 1872, just after the 15-year-old Theo had spent a few days in The Hague with his brother, who was four years his senior. Three months later, Theo went to work for the Goupil branch in Brussels, and they began writing to each other regularly. It is due to his letters to Theo that we have such good picture of the period before Vincent decided to become an artist, the years 1873-1879, when he lived in 12 different places.

Theo van Gogh, 1889 (Amsterdam, Van Gogh Museum / Vincent van Gogh Foundation)



Van Gogh became estranged from his parents and Theo when he was living in the Borinage (December 1878-October 1880). The brothers lost touch with each other for a year, and Vincent’s reason for picking up his pen again was above all a practical one. Theo had sent him some money, and he felt obliged to respond (letter 155). Theo had made the initial suggestion that he become an artist, helped him think of training opportunities, and put him in touch with useful people whenever he could. Van Gogh’s career as an artist thus became the brothers’ joint project, and it was formalized in 1881 when Theo undertook to support him financially. From then on the stream of letters gathered pace, for Vincent always had to confirm receipt of the money Theo sent. He also valued this intensive written contact because he could discuss things with Theo, who got to see all his work and, as an art dealer, knew what he was talking about.

In addition to being a sounding-board for artistic questions, Theo served as a confidant and adviser on matters concerning the family and love affairs. When he disagreed with Theo, as well as in his conflicts with others, Vincent inundated his brother with page after page of arguments designed to prove that he was right and to explain his position, as in the letters of 1881 about his love for his cousin Kee Vos and the family’s interference. Theo, in his turn, tried to rein him in and make him see sense, which did not always go down well.

Since most of Theo’s letters to Vincent are lost, it sometimes seems that the correspondence between the brothers was one-sided, as if the good-natured Theo was always simply around to come to the aid of his impulsive and headstrong brother and received little in return. The surviving correspondence of Theo with other people shows that the opposite was the case. His letters to Jo, in particular, are very revealing about his strong attachment to Vincent. A week after Vincent mutilated his ear and was admitted to hospital in Arles, for example, he wrote: ‘You know, don’t you, how much he has meant to me and that it was he who fostered and nurtured whatever good there might be in me. Even if we had lived together, I would have been very happy if he had long remained that same adviser and brother to me, and to you too, in the fullest sense of the word, from a distance or close by. That hope has now vanished and both our lives are the poorer for it, but it goes to show yet again that one must rely on oneself.’

The time that the brothers lived together in Paris (1886-1888) was a turning point. It was often fraught with friction, but in those two years they grew even closer together. That there were many battles before they reached that stage is clear from Theo’s very frank letter to Willemien of March 1887: ‘There was a time when I loved Vincent very much and he was my best friend, but that’s over now. It seems to be even worse as far as he is concerned, for he loses no opportunity to let me see that he despises me and that I inspire aversion in him. This makes it almost intolerable for me at home.’ Soon afterwards, though, things took a turn for the better, and Theo was able to send Willemien more reassuring news about living with Vincent.

Their relationship had changed when Vincent left for Arles in February 1888, as is very clear from their correspondence from then on. There were no longer any heated exchanges or differences of opinion, but instead mutual understanding and a joint struggle for ‘the art of the future’. Theo had cautiously started exhibiting works by avant-garde artists in his Boussod, Valadon et Cie gallery in the second half of 1887. Vincent’s drive and enterprise dragged Theo into projects promoting the new art, not all of them successful, and Theo clearly admired his brother’s energy. Van Gogh’s artistic development had taken flight in Paris, and by now Theo had absolute confidence in his work. This made their relationship more evenly balanced for Vincent, who had the feeling that at last his paintings were measuring up to the financial support he received from his brother.

Theo usually enclosed a letter with the money that he sent about three times a month. Only 39 of his letters to Vincent have survived, 37 of them from the period 1888-1890, and 2 earlier ones which have been preserved because Vincent wrote his replies on the same sheets. The correspondence between the brothers in the last two years of Vincent’s life is almost complete, with only two or three of Theo’s letters missing between the end of April 1889 and July 1890. We can now keep close track of the dialogue, whereas previously we only knew what Theo wrote indirectly – either from Vincent’s letters or sometimes from the family correspondence.



The parents

Very few of the masses of letters that Van Gogh must have written to his parents have survived: six from 1876-1883 (five to his parents and one to his mother and Theo) and eleven from 1889-1890 (eight to his mother and three to her and Willemien).

There are no longer any of the letters from the parents to Vincent, but we can get a good idea of their contents from the surviving correspondence of other members of the family. Like the letters that his father and mother wrote to Theo, those to Vincent would undoubtedly have been full of good advice and the latest news about the doings of their family and friends.

Vincent’s early letters are full of veneration for his father, the Reverend Van Gogh, in whose footsteps he wanted to follow. But in later years he had a difficult relationship with his father, and there were times when they were simply not on speaking, or indeed writing terms. After the Reverend Van Gogh’s death in March 1885, Vincent moved out of the parental home for good, and six months later left the Netherlands altogether and had no contact with home for a long time. In a letter of August 1886 to a female friend, his sister Willemien gave her view of Vincent’s relations with the rest of the family. ‘His disappointments often embittered him and made him not a normal person. That was a difficult thing for my parents, who could not always follow him and often misunderstood him. My father was a stickler for the proper form, and he never concerned himself with all that; naturally that often caused clashes, and neither of the parties readily forgot words that were spoken in anger. So for the last eight years Vincent had been a problem to many people, and because of the outward appearances they all too often forgot the great deal of good that was in him. The last few years he worked at home with us; after my father’s death Anna thought it would be more peaceful for Ma if he were not to live at home any longer and contrived that he left us. He took that so badly that we have heard nothing from him since then and we only know about him through Theo.’

Van Gogh reopened the correspondence with Willemien, who was living with their mother, when he was in Paris, and towards the end of his life he began picking up the threads with his mother again, writing to her from the south of France from time to time. The recurrent attacks of his mental illness left him isolated and discouraged, and his letters to his mother and Willemien betray a nostalgia for Holland and his youth. Shortly before his death he wrote: ‘I often think of you both, and would very much like to see you again’, but it was not to be.



Cor

No letters have survived between Vincent and his brother Cor, 14 years his junior and the baby of the family. However, Vincent would undoubtedly have received a note now and then from ‘little brother’ of the kind that Cor wrote to Theo, with news about his rabbit and the presents he had been given on the feast of St Nicholas.

Cor was, in his own words, ‘a bad letter-writer’, and later had very little contact with his eldest brother. In October 1888 he wrote tellingly to Theo ‘in fact you’re my only brother’. Vincent regularly asked after him in letters to his mother and Theo, and he sent him ‘an extremely warm-hearted letter’ when Cor was staying with Theo and Jo in Paris prior to leaving for South Africa. It seems that this was the last sign of life between the two brothers.



Anna

When he was young Van Gogh spent a lot of time with Anna, who was two years younger than him. Not one of his letters to her has survived, and the only known one from Anna to him is a short note of December 1875 that she wrote in Welwyn in England. We know that Vincent wrote letters to her from London in 1874 because she quotes from them when writing to Theo. Those quotations and other remarks about Vincent in Anna’s letters have fed speculation about the love he supposedly felt for the daughter of his London landlady. It is very much the question whether he did, but it is certainly clear from Anna’s letters to Theo that Vincent took her into his confidence.

Later in 1874 Anna lived with Vincent in London for several months, but it was not entirely a success. She complained in a letter to Theo that Vincent was too quick to judge people and then tossed them away like ‘a bouquet of wilted flowers’. And by August 1878, when she was preparing for her marriage to Joan van Houten, there was little left of their former attachment. ‘Vincent is more of a wooden lion than ever and is very annoyed at the preparations. For Pa and Ma’s sake I hope so much that this thing in Belgium will succeed, but I fear that his extreme obstinacy and lack of human understanding won’t do him much good in his new situation.’ The breach caused by Anna forcing Vincent to leave the house after their father’s death was never healed. In Saint-Rémy, significantly, he wrote about paintings that he wanted to make for ‘the two sisters’ (Willemien and Lies). Only in letters to his mother did he ask after Anna and her children occasionally, more out of politeness than anything else.



Lies

There are several mentions in the family correspondence of the period 1874-1877 of letters between Vincent and his middle sister Lies, of which there is now no trace. In 1880 she became a lady’s companion to the Du Quesne family in Soesterberg, and Vincent saw little of her after that. They did exchange books occasionally, and she let him read her poems. Vincent probably knew nothing about her affair with Mr Du Quesne and the birth of their illegitimate child in France in 1886. Shortly before his death she sent him a letter through Theo.



Willemien

In the last years of his life Van Gogh was above all close to Willemien, his youngest sister. In 1881 he wrote that he was ‘now corresponding continuously with our sister Willemien’ (187), but no letters from that period have come down to us. All that we have is a note that she wrote to Vincent and Theo in 1875, when she was 13 years old. When Van Gogh moved to Nuenen in 1884, the brother and sister had the opportunity to get to know each other better, despite all the tensions within the family. As a result, Willemien was the only sister with whom Vincent had a good relationship, although in 1885, after a quarrel over their father’s will, he wanted nothing to do with her either for a while. Around 22 May of that year he told Theo that ‘I foresee that the characters of the 3 sisters (all three) will get worse not better with time, and to me at least they’re utterly disagreeable as it is. You remember with how much warmth I wrote to you about Wil when Ma was ill. Well now, it’s been such a short burst – and it’s frozen again’ (506).

However, they got in touch again when Vincent was living in Paris. In the autumn of 1887 she wrote him a letter and enclosed a short story she had written, and although he opened his reply with the words ‘although for my part I so detest writing these days’, he was clearly pleased to exchange ideas with her. His letters to her are more light-hearted than those to Theo, and occasionally he even cracked a joke. He also gave her advice about love: ‘No, my dear little sister, learn to dance or fall in love with one or more notary’s clerks, officers, in short whoever’s within your reach; rather, much rather commit any number of follies than study in Holland’ (574). He hoped that she would marry an artist, and tried to pair her off with Joseph Isaäcson and Emile Bernard.

The letters to Willemien are particularly valuable for the many observations about matters to do with life and being an artist. All of them date from the last three years of his life, during the second 18 months of which he was plagued by mental breakdowns and lost faith in his ability as an artist. He evidently felt fairly free when writing to Willemien, which allowed him to embark on long explanations and often give free rein to his thoughts. Consequently, the letters to her are an important reflection of Van Gogh’s views about life and death, illness and health, art and the practice of art. He displayed his earlier uncompromising stance in his letters to Bernard of the same period, but he dropped his guard with Willemien and allowed her to see his vulnerable side.

In all there are 21 known letters to Willemien, as well as one that was never sent (RM19), and three to her and their mother jointly, all of them written between October 1887 and June 1890, and there are no indications that there were ever any more. It seems, then, that from 1887 on Willemien kept all the letters she received from Vincent. She also let other people read them. For instance, she sent the Paris letter mentioned above (574) to her friend Margreet Meyboom. Vincent’s first few letters to Willemien were written in Dutch, but he then switched to French. Willemien herself always wrote in Dutch. Apart from the letter that she wrote as a young girl in 1875, not one of her letters to Vincent has survived, not even those of 1889-1890, unlike the ones that Theo wrote in that period.



The uncles

The young Vincent probably wrote polite letters from time to time to the two uncles who had such a powerful influence in the Van Gogh family: the art dealers Cornelis Marinus (‘Uncle Cor’ or ‘C.M.’) and Vincent van Gogh (‘Uncle Cent’). One such written to Uncle Cor in March 1877 was in Theo’s estate, and was thus probably never sent. However, there would never have been an intense correspondence with either uncle. Uncle Cent concerned himself with his nephew’s future, and arranged for him to go and work at Goupil’s. In the spring of 1877 Vincent also consulted him over his plan to study theology, but his uncle disapproved of the idea and told him ‘that he thought it unnecessary to continue the correspondence, that he cannot help me in this matter’ (111). None of these letters have survived.

Initially Vincent had greatly admired both uncles, but as time passed that changed into exasperation with their narrow-mindedness and prejudices – largely the same accusations that he levelled at his father. Vincent was still fairly charitable in his letters to Theo about Uncle Cent’s disparaging remarks about his love for Kee Vos in 1881, but when this uncle, like the Reverend Van Gogh, Tersteeg and Mauve, condemned his cohabitation with Sien a year later, Vincent did not conceal his contempt, and wrote that ‘Uncle Cent, is someone with whom I have been on bad terms for many years on account of numerous things’ (235). That that did not change is clear from the fact that he was not mentioned in his uncle’s will.

It was little better with the other uncle. When Van Gogh started out as an artist in The Hague he made an appeal to Uncle Cor, who gave him a sympathetic hearing despite the fact that they had had words in the past. In the spring of 1882, Uncle Cor twice commissioned him to draw series of views of The Hague, but they had a row when ‘C.M.’, as Vincent invariably referred to him at the time, had been ‘disagreeable’ about the drawings (362). Their argument was resolved to some extent due to Theo’s intervention, but relations had cooled, and from then on Vincent approached his uncle through Theo. He nevertheless carried on trying to interest him in his affairs. There is a letter of August 1885 in which he offered him a few studies in exchange for some picture frames, and as late as February 1890 he asked Theo to tell Uncle Cor about his work by sending him an article about it that had just been published.





Artist friends

Van Gogh worked alone for long periods and for much of his career as an artist, but it was not a self-imposed isolation. Although he disliked cliques and official bodies such as the Academy, he was always on the lookout for kindred spirits. He had a real need for an exchange of ideas, for discussing artistic problems and measuring his work against that of other artists, preferably in person but otherwise by mail. If he could speak to people face-to-face he obviously had less need to write. That was the situation when he was living with Theo in Paris where he was surrounded by artists he could talk to, and he wrote less and more briefly to Theo during the two months that he and Gauguin worked together in Arles. However, both in his personal contacts and exchanges of letters Van Gogh rarely succeeded in making the relationships flourish. As in his relations with his family, his friendships were not always proof against criticism and differences of opinion, and they often ended in quarrels.

The letters he wrote to artist friends form a separate group within the correspondence. In common with the letters to Theo, they contain a lot of information about Van Gogh’s use of materials, studio practice and sources of inspiration, and they are indispensable for a proper understanding of his development as an artist. And perhaps even more than the letters to Theo, these written discussions with colleagues give us an insight into his ideas about the art of the day and his own role in it. The nucleus of this part of the correspondence is formed by the letters he exchanged with the Dutch artist Anthon van Rappard (58 from Van Gogh and 1 from Van Rappard) and the French painters Emile Bernard (22 letters from Van Gogh) and Paul Gauguin (4 letters from Van Gogh and 16 to him). There are also a few surviving letters from or to other artists: John Peter Russell, Arnold Koning, Paul Signac, Charles Angrand, Horace Mann Livens and Eugène Boch (for the numbers involved see ‘Overview of all the letters’).

Van Gogh wrote many of these letters not just to exchange ideas but also with a view to collaboration. For instance, he suggested in his letter of the autumn of 1886 to Livens, whom he had got to know at the academy in Antwerp, that the latter should come to Paris, and offered to share living quarters and a studio with him. In Paris Van Gogh made friends with the young avant-garde artists Emile Bernard, Louis Anquetin and Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, whom he involved in the exhibition he organized in the Grand Bouillon-Restaurant du Chalet at the end of 1887. He tried to give firmer shape to his idealistic views of an association of artists after he left Paris. In February 1888, only just arrived in Arles, he was already making plans for a joint exhibition of the Impressionists in Marseille, and he wrote telling Bernard about the advantages and drawbacks of the south of France, so they had evidently discussed the idea of collaboration back in Paris. Not long afterwards he rented the Yellow House with the aim of turning part of it into a studio for himself and another artist, preferably Gauguin, and he came up with a strategy for getting him to come to Arles in which he also involved Theo and Russell. The purpose of his letters to the latter from this period was to persuade him to buy a painting by Gauguin to enable him to pay for his trip to the south. He repeatedly speaks of a shared studio in the letters to Bernard, and even in those to Gauguin after the disastrous end to their collaboration from October to December 1888.

Another reason for corresponding with artists was to propose exchanges of works. Here there were two objectives: to make his own work more widely known, and at the same time to put together a collection of modern art for Theo and himself. That was the object of the letter to Angrand. In the first one that he wrote to Koning in March 1888 (when Koning was living with Theo), which is now lost, he probably also took the opportunity of suggesting an exchange. When he was in Arles he arranged by mail for an exchange of self-portraits with Bernard and Gauguin, who were in Pont-Aven in Brittany, followed immediately by a second exchange with Bernard, Charles Laval, Henri Moret and Ernest de Chamaillard. He had started making exchanges on a modest scale while he was still living in Holland, when he and Van Rappard sent drawings and lithographs back and forth.

Anthon van Rappard

Van Gogh’s correspondence with Anthon van Rappard dates from 1881 to 1885 and thus covers almost the entire Dutch period, the first, crucial stage of Van Gogh’s career. After a difficult time of depression and poverty in the Borinage he had decided to become a draughtsman, and in November 1880 he moved to Brussels. There he met Van Rappard, a student at the academy, who later allowed him to use his studio. Van Rappard later recalled that first meeting: ‘I remember, as though it were yesterday, our first meeting in Brussels, when he came to my room at nine o’clock in the morning; how at first we did not get on very well; although we did later, after having worked together a few times’.

Anthon van Rappard, c. 1880 (Amsterdam, Van Gogh Museum / Documentation)



Their relationship was based on their similar positions as artists just setting out on their careers, even though Van Rappard had started a few years earlier than Van Gogh and came from a very different background. During the Dutch period Van Rappard was the only artist friend with whom Van Gogh could discuss their calling at length, and the technical side of it in particular. Their correspondence began in May 1881, after Van Gogh’s return to Etten.

One recurring theme is magazine illustrations, which both of them collected. Van Gogh made lists of new ones he had acquired, sent duplicates to Van Rappard, who had started collecting them on his advice, and described how he pasted them onto sheets of paper to make them easier to handle and insert in portfolios arranged by subject or the artist’s name.

Van Rappard’s birth into an aristocratic family and his contacts in academic art circles made him in a sense part of the establishment that Van Gogh disliked. However, there were important similarities in their views, as Van Gogh wrote: ‘People strengthen each other when they work together, and an entity is formed without personality having to be blotted out by the collaboration. ... We don’t actually work together, but we have similar ideas about many questions’ (305).

A difference of opinion in 1885 brought an end to their correspondence and friendship. Van Gogh found Van Rappard’s harsh judgement of his lithograph after The potato eaters so hurtful that he sent the offending letter back. It is for that reason that it has survived and that we are able to read Van Rappard’s devastating critique: ‘You’ll agree with me that such work isn’t intended seriously. You can do better than this – fortunately; but why, then, observe and treat everything so superficially? Why not study the movements? Now they’re posing. That coquettish little hand of that woman at the back, how untrue!’

But Van Gogh would not have been Van Gogh if, two months after returning the letter, he had not picked up his pen once more to write a rejoinder. In what turned out to be his final letters to Van Rappard we see him defending his convictions with all his usual passion and stubbornness. Although he eventually accepted Van Rappard’s criticism, or rather put it aside, and wrote to Theo saying that ‘the quarrel is wholly made up’ (529), their relationship soon petered out. Van Rappard later said that the cause of their estrangement was ‘a misunderstanding I have often regretted’. Van Gogh’s departure for Antwerp in November 1885, and then on to Paris three months later, made the distance between them even greater, and later neither of them evidently felt the need to get in touch again.



Emile Bernard

Van Gogh’s friendship and correspondence with Emile Bernard were in some way comparable to those with Van Rappard. In the two years that Van Gogh lived in Paris he spent a lot of time with Bernard, who was 15 years younger. They painted together, helped each other with contacts, and exhibited together. After Van Gogh’s departure for Arles they conducted a lively correspondence and kept each other abreast of what they were doing through letter sketches and drawings. The difference in their ages prompted Van Gogh to play the part of the older and more experienced adviser. This exchange of letters also petered out after an artistic difference of opinion, however, but this time it was Van Gogh who was the merciless critic.

Emile Bernard and his sister Madeleine, c. 1888 (Amsterdam, Van Gogh Museum / Documentation)



Writing about their meeting in 1890, Bernard said that he saw Van Gogh ‘for the first time in Cormon’s studio. ... Then at Tanguy’s shop, that fervent little chapel whose old priest has the kindly smile of misunderstood honesty. When he [Van Gogh] emerged from the back shop, with his high, broad forehead, he was so striking I was almost frightened; but we soon made friends’. This took place in the spring and autumn of 1886 respectively. It was through Bernard that at the end of 1886 Van Gogh got to know Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec and Louis Anquetin better, whom he must already have met at Cormon’s. In the course of 1887, Anquetin and Bernard ostentatiously rejected the Neo-Impressionism of Georges Seurat and Paul Signac, but Van Gogh was keen that the painters of the ‘petit boulevard’ should work together. In the earliest surviving letter to Bernard, of around December 1887, he accordingly takes him to task for refusing to exhibit with Signac.

The letters testify to Van Gogh’s approval of his friend’s work, and they exchanged drawings and paintings on several occasions. The intensity and liveliness of their epistolary contacts also emerges from Bernard’s characterization: ‘I replied to him no less lengthily, also filling my letters with sketches of my canvases in progress. We had formed this plan of drawing as one writes, and with the same fluency as would a Hokusai or an Utamaro’.

They wrote to each other almost continuously between March and October 1888, but after Van Gogh’s letter of 1 or 2 November of that year, when Gauguin was staying with him in the Yellow House, the correspondence ceased for almost a year. Van Gogh’s fluctuating mental health and his disappointment over the failure of the collaboration with Gauguin must have played a part, and there is no reason to assume that there was any change in his friendly feelings towards Bernard. After that break of almost a year the correspondence resumed in October 1889, and Van Gogh was as involved in his friend’s doings as ever. But in his very last letter to him in November 1889 he was so dismissive of Bernard’s paintings that he must have killed any desire on the latter’s part to carry on writing.

Although no more letters followed, the friendship was not over. They did not get the opportunity to revive it, though, for when Van Gogh returned to the north in May 1890 Bernard was not in Paris, so they were unable to meet while Van Gogh stayed there on his way to Auvers-sur-Oise.



Paul Gauguin

The surviving correspondence between Van Gogh and Gauguin covers the period March 1888 to June 1890. The letters to Gauguin are different in tone from those to Van Rappard and Bernard. They are less direct, more formal, and emanate a palpable respect. They largely deal with the same topics discussed in the letters to Bernard of the same period (health, the direction that modern painting should take, the progress of works), but Van Gogh is not so free when addressing Gauguin. The latter’s letters display a similar reserve, although that does not alter the fact that they had a great deal of respect for each other.

Paul Gauguin with his son Emil and his daughter Aline, 1891 (Amsterdam, Van Gogh Museum / Documentation)



Van Gogh and Gauguin must have met in Paris in November or December 1887. Gauguin had returned in the middle of November after a six-month stay in Panama and Martinique. They may first have met in the Boussod, Valadon & Cie gallery that was run by Theo. Gauguin must have been there before 6 December to discuss exhibiting his work in the gallery. However, it is also possible that they got to know each other at the exhibition that Vincent organized in the Grand Bouillon-Restaurant du Chalet in November-December 1887. Gauguin is known to have visited it, and he exchanged work with Van Gogh because of it.

Gauguin’s reputation had undoubtedly gone before him, and Van Gogh must already have known quite a bit about him before they met. Although Gauguin found it difficult to sell his work, he was already a well-known figure in the Parisian avant-garde in 1886. He had taken part in the Impressionists’ exhibitions, had worked closely with Camille Pissarro and was a friend of Edgar Degas. The stories about the bohemian who had abandoned his job, his wife and his children in order to become an artist, and had left for the tropical island of Martinique in search of a new way of painting, must have appealed to Van Gogh. Gauguin, in his turn, was in urgent need of contacts among the avant-garde, because as a result of his quarrel with Pissarro and the Neo-Impressionists he had few friends left. Getting to know Vincent, and Theo in particular, who took work of his on commission and exhibited it, and even bought a painting for his own collection, was therefore just what he needed.

The friendship with Gauguin did not yet amount to very much when Van Gogh left Paris, unlike that with Bernard. Gauguin went to Brittany at the end of January 1888, but since they did not tell each other about their travel plans it appears that they did not see each other very often. There was no question of them being a trio with Bernard at that time, on the contrary, Van Gogh later recalled that ‘last winter Bernard was still trying to pick a quarrel with Gauguin’. The trio only came into being, at a distance, when Bernard called on Gauguin in Pont-Aven on Van Gogh’s advice in the summer of 1888. The two of them then worked intensively together, showed each other Vincent’s letters to them, and at his request painted portraits for an exchange.

When Van Gogh received a letter from Gauguin in Arles at the end of February 1888 complaining that he was on the rocks, Vincent immediately began making plans to help him out of trouble. At the end of May he suggested to Theo that they should get Gauguin to come to Arles in return for financial support. He himself was longing for company, because his limited contacts with artists and amateur artists there were not providing him with the ideas and inspiration he needed. He wanted to found a colony of painters with Gauguin, and breathe new life into the art of the south.

Gauguin was initially rather lukewarm about the plan, but undoubtedly soon realized that it did offer him a way out of the impasse he was in, and that it would be a means of strengthening his ties with Theo and thus with the art trade. When he finally arrived in Arles at the end of October, Van Gogh’s expectations were high. The two months they lived and worked together have been discussed at length by many commentators, and it ended dramatically. Van Gogh cut his ear off in a fit of madness and was admitted to hospital. Gauguin decided to return to Paris as soon as possible. They resumed their correspondence a few weeks after the drama had occurred. Despite Van Gogh’s disappointment at Gauguin’s departure, the tone of their letters continued to be friendly, but it was more reserved than ever. They continued to address each other with ‘vous’, as they did before they worked together.

The note that Van Gogh wrote to Gauguin immediately after leaving hospital sounds cordial enough, but his letters to Theo show that he was very disgruntled with Gauguin and reveal how hurt he was by his hasty departure from Arles. He compares him with Bompard, a character in Daudet’s Tartarin de Tarascon who lies to his friend and betrays him, and recommends that Theo read the book if he wants to know ‘how things happened’ (736). Tellingly, in his next letter he asks Gauguin if he has read Tartarin by now, but then immediately adds: ‘The imagination of the south creates pals, doesn’t it, and between us we always have friendship’ (739).

Their friendship did indeed survive the dramatic turn of events, as demonstrated by the paintings that Gauguin received from Vincent via Theo and the few letters that have survived from 1890, in which they cautiously explore the possibility of a new collaboration. Around 7 July 1890 Gauguin told Theo: ‘I have had 2 quite calm letters from Vincent, which I enjoyed’. Van Gogh told him in one of them that he was planning to visit him and Meijer de Haan in Brittany. It was the last time that Gauguin heard from him; Van Gogh died three weeks later. Gauguin wrote to Bernard: ‘However sad one is at this death, I do not really lament it, because I foresaw it and I knew the suffering of that poor boy, battling his madness. Dying now is great good luck for him, it means the end of his suffering, and if he ever returns in another life he will reap the rewards of his good behaviour in this world (according to the law of Buddha). He took with him the consolation that he was not forsaken by his brother and was understood by some artists’.





Preservation of the letters

Kept or thrown away

Theo was the great hoarder in the family, and it is thanks to his conscientious stewardship of letters, photographs, bills, account books and other documents, some of them mere scraps, that so much has survived. He kept huge piles of letters, from Jo Bonger, first his fiancée and then his wife, and from his relatives and family members, and later his mother returned letters that he and others had written to her. After his death in 1891 they remained in his estate thanks to Jo, their son Vincent Willem, and the Vincent van Gogh Foundation, and are now preserved in the Van Gogh Museum.

Although a lot has survived there are also glaring gaps. The family correspondence falls off dramatically after August 1879, and shortly afterwards dries up altogether. Now it could be that Theo did not keep his belongings in this period, or that they were lost, but it is by no means impossible that letters have deliberately been kept back. Jan Hulsker suspected that some had been destroyed because they would reveal too much about the conflict between the family and Vincent. In 1880, after all, his father wanted to have him committed to the mental asylum in Geel, Belgium. It is also possible that letters, or parts of letters from early 1883 have been lost, perhaps because of their intimate nature. This is reinforced by the fact that there are letters missing in which Vincent thanked Theo for money he had received. It is not known who was responsible for this censorship, if that is what it was, or when it was done. It was by no means uncommon for documents detailing conflicts to be thrown away in order to create a sanitized picture of a family for posterity.

Vincent himself was decidedly careless with his mail. For example, the letters he received from his parents before 1877 suddenly came to light when they were discovered by chance in a reading-desk at the house of the Roos family in The Hague where he had been a lodger. They were then lost again, and it is a vain hope that these and several hundred other letters, particularly those from Theo to Vincent, will ever reappear.

Occasionally the question of whether to keep letters or not is raised by Vincent. ‘Have you saved my epistles? If you have a moment and they haven’t yet perished in the flames, read them again, I say, though perhaps it’s pretentious to ask such a thing of you. Still, I wrote them in earnest, though I didn’t hesitate to speak plainly and to give free rein to my imagination.’

We have only 83 letters that were written to Van Gogh. Unlike Theo, he was not a hoarder, and he is known to have thrown or burned letters he received. The letters from Theo, Anna and Willemien and the one from Van Rappard are the only ones that still exist from before 1886, when he went to live with Theo in Paris. One from Gauguin was left behind in Paris. The remaining 77 letters all date from the last two years of Van Gogh’s life, and the bulk of them (65) were written after his first mental breakdown at the end of December 1888. Chance certainly played an important part in this, but it is nevertheless tempting to try and discover some logical pattern that would explain why some letters were kept and ended up in Theo’s possession, while others were not.

Some of those that Van Gogh received in Provence have survived because he sent them on for Theo to read. That is what happened, for instance, with the one from Octave Maus and with 4 of the 16 letters from Gauguin. The first one he got from Gauguin in Arles escaped oblivion through absent-mindedness, for he wrote to Theo that he thought he had burned it but had now found it again and sent it for him to read. It is understandable that he did not think it worth keeping this rather businesslike letter. He was more careful with later ones from Gauguin dealing with artistic matters. Some he sent to Theo, and there are a few containing sketches and descriptions of works of art.

There are clear indications that at a certain point Vincent decided to keep the letters from Theo and Jo, for they have survived almost in their entirety from the end of April 1889 on. That could also be because other people packed up his belongings or cleared up after him and gave or sent them to Theo (such as Joseph Roulin, who cleared up the Yellow House after the ear episode, and the doctor Théophile Peyron, who sent things on from the asylum in Saint-Rémy). It is odd that the letters from Theo and Jo were preserved while those from Willemien and Mrs Van Gogh are missing, but one possible explanation is that Theo gave these back to them after Vincent’s death.

It is difficult to come up with a reason why the other letters to Van Gogh have survived. He could have kept the one from Signac because of the invitation to come and visit him, and he would have kept others apart because they contained the sender’s address (like the calling card from Salles and the letters from Milliet and Mourier-Petersen). It stands to reason that Van Gogh found the letters from Gauguin important and interesting enough to keep, but then why don’t we have all of them? And why have those from Bernard vanished? Although Vincent told Theo in September 1888 that he was keeping them and that they were ‘quite a bundle’ (682), they are nevertheless lost. That is a pity, because there were a lot of sketches in them, and it would be fascinating to follow the discussion between the two artists from both sides.



Lost correspondence

In addition to the 903 extant letters there must have been a considerable number from and to Van Gogh that we no longer have. This can be deduced from remarks like ‘Thank you for your letter’, ‘I received a letter from’, ‘I’ve written to’ and so on. In the surviving correspondence of other members of the family – particularly letters received by Theo – there are also references to letters from and to Vincent. An inventory of those statements shows that in addition to the existing corpus there must have been around 290 other letters that he wrote, and some 550 that he received. This brings the total of known and ‘virtual’ letters to around 1,750. It is quite impossible to say how many others have disappeared without leaving any demonstrable trace of their existence.

The letters to Theo contain numerous references to letters from him to Vincent that are no longer extant (they have been included in the above totals), but there were undoubtedly more. Additionally, Theo’s regular remittances of money must almost always have been accompanied by a letter, even if Vincent merely confirmed receipt of the money and made no reference to the letter. As against the 57 letters from Van Gogh to Anthon van Rappard there is just a single reply from the latter (letter 503). The correspondence with Gauguin must have amounted to more than what we now have, and all the letters from Emile Bernard to Van Gogh have to be considered lost. There must have been a few dozen of them, as well as a similar number from Van Gogh’s sister Willemien.

It can be assumed that by far the majority of the lost letters dated from early in Van Gogh’s life, for it would only have been natural for him to start writing regularly to members of the family and other relatives, however dutifully, when he left the parental home in the summer of 1869, and for him to continue doing so until around 1875, when he gradually began paying less heed to the norms and etiquette with which he had been brought up. We also know that he corresponded with the Gladwells, father and son, Uncle Hein and Uncle Jan, his teacher Mendes da Costa, his cousin Kee Vos and her father J.P.S. Stricker when he was courting her in the autumn of 1881, and with his girlfriends Sien Hoornik and Margot Begemann, but nothing of this has survived. Just as Van Gogh cleared up by burning letters or throwing them away, so many of the letters that he himself wrote to others have been destroyed in the course of time.

Woman with a child on her lap (Sien with her daughter Maria), 1883 (F 1067 / JH 356), Amsterdam, Van Gogh Museum / Vincent van Gogh Foundation



That was the case, for instance, with the correspondence with Margot Begemann. She was the Van Goghs’ neighbour in Nuenen with whom Vincent started an affair in 1884. He considered marrying her, but both families were dead set against it. The drama reached its pitch with Margot’s attempted suicide, according to Van Gogh because people spoke badly of them (he gives a vivid account of the events in letter 456 to Theo). The Reverend Van Gogh informed Theo shortly afterwards: ‘It’s said that the relationship has been broken off, but the friendship will continue. They still correspond constantly’. Van Gogh visited her a few times in Utrecht, where her family had sent her to live with a doctor friend, and their correspondence dated from that period. Margot’s niece, Sientje Begemann, later recalled that ‘Aunt Go had lots of letters from Vincent. She burned them all. It was forbidden to utter the name Vincent in the Begemann household’.

Margot Begemann, (Amsterdam, Van Gogh Museum / Documentation)



The letters that Van Gogh wrote to H.G. Tersteeg, his and later Theo’s boss in the Goupil gallery in The Hague, also ended up on the fire. The successful Tersteeg was a model for the brothers, and when Vincent decided to become an artist his former employer was a connection in the art world of whom he had high hopes. Tersteeg was amenable at first, but he too turned his back on Van Gogh when he started living with Sien. Vincent was constantly railing against Tersteeg in his letters to Theo from that period, and the many pages that he devotes to ‘H.G.T.’ show that he found it very difficult to be rejected by the man who, according to Theo, had been ‘almost like an elder brother’ to them. The breach was never repaired, although later in Arles Van Gogh did try, through Theo, to interest Tersteeg in the art of the Impressionists, and wanted to give him a painting.

H.G. Tersteeg, c. 1885 (Amsterdam, Van Gogh Museum / Documentation)



Van Gogh’s sister Elisabeth later recalled that Tersteeg had ‘a chiffonier with drawers full of letters from Vincent’. According to Tersteeg’s son Johan, those ‘two or three hundred letters’ were thrown into the stove one day: ‘my father did not consider all that writing so important – don’t talk artist, paint!’ Van Gogh’s letters were not the only ones that Tersteeg burned, ‘letters by masters of the Hague School also went into the fire from time to time’, according to his son. Only one letter from Van Gogh, which Tersteeg’s wife had given away, resurfaced a few years ago. Dated 3 August 1877, it is a letter of condolence on the death of Tersteeg’s newborn daughter. Convention dictated a restrained, short letter, but Van Gogh, an aspiring student of theology and obsessed with religion, took several liberties. The letter was very long and peppered with quotations from the Bible, Van Gogh inserted new text between the lines, wrote about himself in order to create a good impression, and signed off with a cheery ‘Yours truly’ (in English), and even went so far as to ask Tersteeg to pass on an enclosed letter to Theo. All the same, his compassion is palpable, and he made things easier for Tersteeg by going over several letters in his spidery handwriting to make them more legible.

Then there is the case of the supposed correspondence between Van Gogh and the Hague factory owner Lodewijk Cornelis Enthoven. According to members of his family he supported Van Gogh financially in his Hague period, and later received an ‘endless stream of laments, ... all of them accompanied by small sketches and scratches’ from Nuenen and Antwerp. Van Gogh is said to have written to him from France and to have sent him rolls of paintings and sketches, but after Enthoven’s death they were found unopened in the attic and burned by his children. However, there is no mention at all of this correspondence with Enthoven in Van Gogh’s letters, and there is no tangible evidence to support these assertions.

A lot of Van Gogh’s correspondence with other artists has also been lost. We only have three letters from him to the Australian painter John Peter Russell, but there must have been at least five more. Arnold Koning also had more than the two that are now known. In 1912 he wrote to Albert Plasschaert: ‘He never stopped talking about his work and his ideas on colour, about which I will send you a couple of letters from that period for your perusal. I had some more, but they have disappeared as a result of numerous moves’.

Unfortunately, nothing has survived of the exchange of letters between Van Gogh and the Hague School artist Anton Mauve, who was his cousin by marriage. In 1881 Mauve helped him as he took his first steps on the path to becoming a painter, and Van Gogh greatly admired him at the time. ‘Mauve gave me encouragement recently when I needed it. He’s a man of genius’ (176). He continued to be a guiding light for Van Gogh until they had a quarrel in the spring of 1882 and Mauve broke off all contact with him, and once again it was because of Van Gogh’s bad behaviour, his ‘vicious character’ (in Mauve’s words), and his relationship with Sien. That Van Gogh nevertheless continued to value his teacher as an artist is clear from the many times he mentions him in the letters. He was deeply affected by the news of Mauve’s death at the end of March 1888, and decided to dedicate his painting Pink peach trees (F 394 / JH 1379) to him and asked for it to be given it to his widow.

Shortly after arriving in Arles Van Gogh wrote not only to Bernard but to another artist friend in Paris, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, for he had ‘solemnly promised to write’ to both of them (588). They must have regularly spent time together in Paris, but Toulouse-Lautrec evidently did not reply, and Van Gogh never wrote to him again, as far as we know. Toulouse-Lautrec’s published correspondence shows that he was not the fervent letter-writer that Van Gogh was. For him, letters were mainly a way of staying in touch with his family and making business appointments, and not for sharing his ideas about life and art or going into deep discussions about artistic matters. Theo told the friends about each other’s work, and during Vincent’s last visit to Paris on 6 July 1890 Toulouse-Lautrec dropped by to see him. Jo recalled that the pair of them ‘had the biggest laugh ... about an undertaker’s assistant, whom they met on the stairs’. A few weeks later, Toulouse-Lautrec wrote to Theo on the occasion of Vincent’s death: ‘You know what a friend he was to me and how eager he was to demonstrate his affection’.

A very small number of letters, eleven in all, can be described as business correspondence. Most of those in this category are now lost, such as the ones that Van Gogh wrote in 1878 to the clergymen Nicolaas de Jonge, Abraham van der Waeyen Pieterszen and Emile Rochedieu in order to be admitted as a trainee evangelist in Laeken in Belgium, and the ‘rather long and consequently impractical’ letter that he sent to Theo in April 1885 for the Paris art dealer Alphonse Portier. He wrote to the painter Charles-Emmanuel Serret with the same purpose, to draw attention to his Potato eaters. In the summer of 1885 he corresponded with the Hague paint merchant Willem Leurs, who had paintings of his on commission. None of these letters have survived. There is one surviving letter to Hendrik Jan Furnée (523), and one crossed-out order for paints (RM13), but the rest of the correspondence is lost.

From Arles Van Gogh wrote to Guillaume Tasset of the Paris suppliers of artists’ materials Tasset & Lhôte in order to explain an order for paints, and on one occasion in Saint-Rémy he ordered canvas from him, as he told Theo (these letters to Tasset no longer exist). These were exceptions, because it was usually Theo who placed the orders with Tasset. Vincent also received invitations through Theo to exhibit. In addition to Octave Maus of Les Vingt, Edouard Dujardin approached him on behalf of the Revue Indépendante. The letters from and to Maus have been preserved, but the one from Dujardin and Van Gogh’s refusal have not.

On the basis of all these facts, clues and assumptions, we estimate that Van Gogh’s total correspondence may have run to more than 2,000 letters.









Letter from Theo van Gogh to Jo Bonger, 1 January 1889 (FR b2022). See Brief happiness, pp. 76-77.

See Documentation, letter from Theo van Gogh to Willemien van Gogh, 14 March 1887 (FR b908).

See Documentation, letters from Theo van Gogh to Willemien van Gogh, 25 April 1887 and 24-26 February 1888 (FR b911 and b914).

See, for example, letter 611: ‘The cab we drag along must be of use to people we don’t know. But you see, if we believe in the new art, in the artists of the future, our presentiment doesn’t deceive us’.

For these remittances see ‘Vincent’s income and expenditure’ in The financial backgrounds.

These are letters 45 and 46, and 197 and 199, which are treated as separate letters in this edition. In both cases Vincent added his reply on the letter Theo had written.

In letter 823 Vincent acknowledges receipt of a consignment of paints and a woollen waistcoat, which could also have included a letter from Theo, although that is not certain. His remark about Jo could be a reaction to what Theo had written, or equally to the latter’s earlier letter 820. One letter from Theo in this period that is certainly missing is the one in which he told Vincent about the sale of The red vineyard (F 495 / JH 1626) to Anna Boch. See letter 855. The letter from Theo to which Vincent refers in letter 875 is also lost.

For the parents’ letters see ‘Letters within the Van Gogh family’ in Biographical and historical context.

Letter from Willemien van Gogh to Line Kruysse, 26 August 1886 (FR b4536).

Letter 899.

See, for example, FR b2744 and b2574, letters from Cor van Gogh to Theo van Gogh, 30 April 1875 and undated (on or around 7 December 1875?).

Letter from Cor van Gogh to Theo and Jo van Gogh, 8 October 1890 (FR b837).

Letter from Cor van Gogh to Theo van Gogh, 16 October 1888 (FR b3706).

See letter 795, and FR b944, a letter from Jo van Gogh-Bonger to Willemien van Gogh, 23 August 1889.

Only a fragment of a letter on the back of a drawing might have been addressed to Anna; see RM1. The poem RM12 could also have been intended for her. The letter from Anna to Vincent is 64.

See Documentation, letters from Anna van Gogh to Theo van Gogh, 6 January 1874 and 24 February 1874 (FR b2679 and b2689). Both were written in English (which was compulsory at her boarding school). In the second one she quotes Vincent: ‘In the last letter he writes me: “I fear that after all the sunshine I enjoy from there could be very soon rain – but I will only enjoy as long as possible the sunshine, and have my umbrella in the neighbourhood for the rain that could come.”’ She probably translated the quotation into English herself.

See the memoir by Jo van Gogh-Bonger in The complete letters 1958, pp. xxiv-xxv, and Bailey 1992, pp. 16-18. They suppose that he fell in love with Eugénie Loyer. It is more likely that the object of his youthful affection was his cousin Caroline Haanebeek. See letters 182 and 183, and Cassee 1997.

Letter from Anna van Gogh to Theo van Gogh, 28 April 1875 (FR b2333).

Letter from Anna van Gogh to Theo van Gogh, 13 August 1878 (FR b989).

See letter 451.

See the letter from Lies van Gogh to Theo and Jo van Gogh, 29 June 1890 (FR b2413). The letter in question has not survived.

Letter 63.

Letter 574.

On this see letters 673, 674, 815 and 843. Cf. also letters 827 and 841, in which Vincent writes at length about Bernard to Willemien.

See letters 670 and 771.

See Kept or thrown away.

Letter 107.

See letter 164.

For the city views for Uncle Cor see letters 210 and 214.

Letters 525 and 854.

Letter 570.

See letters 582 and 600.

See letters 680 and 696.

Pickvance 1992, p. 102.

On Van Gogh’s collection of magazine illustrations see Luijten 2003.

Letters 503 and 504. Since 2006, Van Gogh’s letters to Van Rappard are in the collection of the Vincent van Gogh Foundation in the Van Gogh Museum. They were offered for sale to V.W. van Gogh as early as 1936, but he thought the price was too high ‘even with a big reduction’, as he informed Annie de Meester-Obreen on 6 April 1936 (FR b6996-18). She wanted to provide financial support for her son, who was an artist, by selling the set of letters, assisted by the American manufacturer Frank Knothe (FR b6996-29), who had married Annie’s sister Maria Adriana Cornelia Obreen on 1 May 1889. On Annie’s behalf they tried to sell the letters in New York ‘for not less than three or four thousand guilders’ (FR b6996-5). In 1954, a year after Annie’s death, the letters were in the hands of a New York art gallery; in June 2006 they were acquired by the Van Gogh Museum.

Letter 514. The discussion continued in letters 516, 518, 520 and 521.

Pickvance 1992, p. 102.

See Van Gogh 2007 for a detailed examination of the friendship and correspondence with Bernard.

Bernard 1994, vol. 1, p. 26.

For the dating of Van Gogh’s time with Cormon and Bernard’s remarks about it see Van Tilborgh 2007. Julien (‘père’) Tanguy was a dealer in drawing and painting materials who also exhibited and sold work by avant-garde artists. It was a popular meeting point for them, and Van Gogh was often to be found there.

This was the term that Van Gogh coined for the new generation of painters in order to distinguish them from the Impressionists, who were already part of the established order by the 1880s and were represented by the dealers of the ‘grands boulevards’. He counted Degas, Monet, Renoir, Sisley and Camille Pissarro among their number. The ‘petit boulevard’ consisted of Guillaumin, Seurat, Gauguin, Bernard, Anquetin, Angrand, Toulouse-Lautrec, Signac, Lucien Pissarro and himself. See letter 584 and exhib. cat. Saint Louis 2001, pp. 65-108.

On Bernard’s influence on Van Gogh’s painting in the Paris period see cat. Amsterdam 2011. For a conspectus of the works by Bernard owned by Van Gogh and vice versa, see Van Gogh 2007, pp. 366-367.

Lettres à Bernard 1911, Introduction, p. 14.

On Gauguin’s meeting with the Van Gogh brothers see Merlhès 1984, pp. 470-471, and exhib. cat. Chicago 2001, pp. 81-82.

That was the day on which he wrote to his wife Mette: ‘Maison Goupil ... has become the centre of the Impressionists. Little by little they’re going to force us on their clientele’; see Merlhès 1984, p. 166.

See letter 575 for the exhibition, and letters 576 and 640 for the exchange with Gauguin.

On 4 January 1888 Theo bought Gauguin’s Among the mangoes (Amsterdam, Van Gogh Museum). See Gauguin lettres 1983, p. 33 (FR b876). On Gauguin’s split from Pissarro and the Neo-Impressionists see Merlhès 1984, pp. 139-141, and exhib. cat. Chicago 2001, pp. 59-61, 68.

It is clear from Gauguin’s letter 581 of on or around 29 February 1888, in which he writes ‘I have left to work in Brittany’, that he was unaware that Van Gogh had already gone to Arles.

Letter 683. He meant the winter of 1887-1888. Bernard himself wrote that he first met Gauguin in Pont-Aven in 1886, but only got to know him better when he returned there in 1888. See Bernard 1994, vol. 1, pp. 76, 201, 252, 296.

Bernard’s Self-portrait with portrait of Gauguin, and Gauguin’s Self-portrait with portrait of Bernard, ‘Les misérables’ (both Amsterdam, Van Gogh Museum). Bernard received in exchange Van Gogh’s Quay with sand barges (F 449 / JH 1558) and Gauguin Self-portrait (F 476 / JH 1581). See letters 680ff.

See letter 616. Letter 581 is the one from Gauguin.

Apart from his sporadic meetings with the local chemist-cum-paint supplier and amateur artist Jules Armand, Van Gogh got to know two artists in his first three months in Arles: the Dane Christian Mourier-Petersen and the American Dodge Macknight. In mid-June he met the Belgian painter Eugène Boch and Paul Eugène Milliet, a lieutenant in the Zouaves to whom he gave drawing lessons.

On the collaboration between Van Gogh and Gauguin see exhib. cat. Chicago 2001, esp. ch. 4. For the events of 23 December 1888, when Van Gogh cut off his ear, see letter 728, n. 1.

The ‘draft letter’ for Gauguin, which Van Gogh sent for Theo’s approval at the end of May 1888 (included as the appendix to letter 616), is the only time he addressed him with the familiar ‘tu’. Apart from that they always used the formal ‘vous’.

Letter 730.

Gauguin received a version of Augustine Roulin (‘La berceuse’) (F 506 / JH 1670) and one of Marie Ginoux (‘The Arlésienne’) (F 542 / JH 1894); see letter 776, n. 4, and letter 884, n. 2. He also acquired the Reaper (F 617 / JH 1753) and, possibly, Ravine (F 662 / JH 1804); see cat. Otterlo 2003, pp. 304-305, and letter 858, n. 5. In letters 844 and 892, and RM23, there is mention of Van Gogh working together with Gauguin and Meijer de Haan.

Gauguin lettres 1946, pp. 200-201.

See Brief happiness 1999.

Hulsker 1993-2, p. 126. See letters 185 and 155, and Jansen et al. 2003-2. What Vincent wrote in letter 406 is interesting in this connection: ‘Make no mistake – there has perhaps – no certainly – been a crisis both at home and in my own life when I really believe that all our lives were, as it were, literally saved by you – ruin averted by the support and protection that we got from you – for me, in particular, it was critical’. It is therefore possible that it was not just problems with Vincent that were responsible for gaps in the correspondence but that other difficulties in the parental home accounted for the disappearance of letters.

Theo had a lover at this time; see letters 300ff.

See Arianne Baggerman, ‘Autobiography and family memory in the nineteenth century’, in: Egodocuments and history. Autobiographical writing in its social context since the Middle Ages. Ed. R. Dekker. Hilversum 2002, pp. 161-173 (http://www.egodocument.net). It is known that the Dutch artist Alexander Ver Huell was ‘deliberately selective’ in preserving his documents. See Bervoets 1997, pp. 13, 37-38.

Letter 112.

Letter 188.

Letter 576.

All the letters to Van Gogh come from Theo’s estate with the exception of the one from Van Rappard that Van Gogh returned to the sender.

The letter from Maus is 818, while the four from Gauguin are 581, 586, 646 and 675.

See letter 583.

See letters 729 and 876.

In reality there were more, because this total does not take into less specific remarks like ‘am writing to’, multiple reactions that Van Gogh received to an advertisement, and so on.

See also the list under ‘Overview of all the letters’.

Letter from the Reverend Van Gogh to Theo van Gogh, 2 October 1884 (FR b2257).

Handwritten note in the Van Gogh Museum documentation (FR b7117), possibly by H. Nauta, who wrote to Elisabeth du Quesne-Van Gogh on 31 August 1927(FR b5301).

Letter 221.

See letters 580ff. The painting that Van Gogh had earmarked for Tersteeg was The Langlois bridge with washerwomen (F 397 / JH 1368).

Interview in the Algemeen Handelsblad of 5 May 1934.

Luijten 1997-1, pp. 100-101.

Letter 124. It is discussed at greater length in Jansen et al. 2003-1.

Visser 1973, pp. 9-12, 18-19.

Letters to Russell are mentioned in letters 582, 583, 604, 635, 638 and 654. Van Gogh also gave Mourier-Petersen a letter of introduction to Russell (see letter 610). Henry Thannhauser actually estimated that ‘Russell must have destroyed at least a dozen letters from van Gogh’. Cf. V.E. Endicott Barnett et al., Guggenheim Museum, Thannhauser Collection. New York 1992, p. 174.

Letter from Arnold Koning to Albert Plasschaert, 8 May 1912 (FR b3024).

Van Gogh quotes these words of Mauve’s in letter 224.

Mauve died on 8 February 1888. Van Gogh only heard of his death at the end of March when Willemien sent him an obituary that had been published (see letter 591).

The letter to Bernard is 587; Van Gogh’s letter to Toulouse-Lautrec has not survived.

Cf. The letters of Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec. Ed. Herbert Schimmel. Oxford 1991. For the contacts between Van Gogh and Toulouse-Lautrec see cat. Amsterdam 2011.

See Jo’s memoir in The complete letters, p. LII.

Pickvance 1992, p. 114.

These are Van Gogh’s letters to Hendrik Jan Furnée, Johannes van Hombergh, Octave Maus, Michiel de Zwart, and those from Henriette Lamblot-Gaudin, Octave Maus, Frédéric Salles and Théophile Peyron to Van Gogh.

See letters 145, 147 and 149.

See letters 494, 509 and 515.

In letters 523 and 527 Van Gogh mentions receiving a postcard and a letter from Furnée.

For Tasset see letters 668 and 758, for Dujardin 718, and for Maus 818 and 821.

